“One hell of a storm” — that’s the unofficial designation South African Weather Service forecasters have given the system moving into Cape Town on Wednesday. Gale-force winds of about 90km/h‚ 12m to 15m swells and 80mm of rain are expected to batter the region within a 24-hour window‚ leaving city officials and forecasters on high alert. “Residents should make real preparations for the storm and not take it lightly‚” SAWS communications manager Hannelee Doubell said. “They should be prepared to stay inside their homes. Outside they should tie down belongings because we are expecting abnormally strong winds.” The City of Cape Town is ready to evacuate people in high-risk areas in preparation for the storm. Charlotte Powell‚ spokesman for the Disaster Management Centre‚ said the centre was on stand-by should the cold front become “dangerous”. “Our NGO partners are ready for humanitarian relief and we have plans to evacuate people in high-risk areas to emergency shelters such as community halls if it becomes necessary‚” said Powell‚ who added the front could well turn out to be a “normal winter storm”. She advised Capetonians to fix leaking roofs‚ open paths to allow stormwater to flow through‚ stay indoors and dress warmly. The national weather service issued warnings for several areas, including the Winelands‚ Cape metropole and the Overberg. Forecaster Thabisile Ntleko said winds‚ high seas and flooding could even result in “loss of life”. Council crews were on call on Monday‚ checking water drainage infrastructure for blockages and preparing storm canals. “There are concerns about flooding and damage to infrastructure‚ but we believe we are prepared to handle that. What the city needs is rain and we welcome this weather. The city and province need substantial rainfall to recover‚” said mayoral committee member Xanthea Limberg. With dam levels at 19%‚ Limberg emphasised the importance of any amount of rain to Cape Town. “If we receive below-average rain this winter, then it will take beyond three years for our water infrastructure to recover. This rain will help, but it won’t resolve the problem‚” she said. - The Times Need to stay informed? Published by Tiso Blackstar and distributed 
                with the Financial Mail on the last Thursday
                of every month except December and January.