Even some members of parliament are not sure how voting in the National Assembly will take place on Tuesday. MPs are due to cast their vote on a motion of no confidence against President Jacob Zuma. Speaker Baleka Mbete announced on Monday that she would allow a secret ballot. But many are not clear on how that will work since it is the first time a closed vote takes place on a motion of confidence. The Freedom Front Plus party even expressed concern that the secrecy of the vote might be compromised. Parliament explained on Tuesday morning how the carefully choreographed process will unfold. After each party has stated its case in a debate‚ MPs will be given a paper on which to make their mark. The votes will then be counted in a guarded room‚ under the watchful eye of party representatives‚ then they will be signed off by the secretary of the National Assembly before the results are announced by the Speaker. Procedure for Voting by Secret Ballot in National Assembly https://t.co/ED6avP0gqb #VotingProcess #SecretBallot pic.twitter.com/owNYZrkF1X The motion Parliament has released a copy of the draft resolution of the DA’s motion of no confidence in Zuma which lists the reasons the DA thinks he should be fired by the National Assembly. These include the axing of Pravin Gordhan as finance minister during a Cabinet reshuffle in March and the disastrous economic consequences that followed. The paper urges the House to express its lack of confidence in Zuma on the basis of his “continued irrational‚ irresponsible and reckless leadership”. Should the motion succeed‚ the president will have to step down‚ along with his Cabinet. The ANC enjoys a majority of 249 in the 400-member National Assembly‚ meaning that 50 ANC members would have to back the motion tabled by DA leader Mmusi Maimane. TimesLIVE Need to stay informed? Published by Tiso Blackstar and distributed 
                with the Financial Mail on the last Thursday
                of every month except December and January.