President Zuma’s apparent strategy is increasingly similar to that outlined by one Abraham Lincoln: “The best way to predict your future is to create it”. Indeed, with Zuma under pressure both on legal and political issues, he now has limited time to put in place a series of events in which he hopes to secure an unfettered retirement – free from concern about prosecution. In order to achieve this, Zuma must first create an immediate cabinet environment that is largely supportive of himself but also of those vested interests (both political and business) that support him and derive benefit from his coat-tails. Secondly, Zuma needs to keep a variety of vested interest groups relatively happy – be they the Gupta’s, State Owned Enterprise cadres or those who will derive benefits from big ticket deals like the nuclear procurement program. Thirdly, he must re-engineer his cabinet to coalesce around his preferred successor (Nokosaza Dlamini-Zuma) and potentially isolate the other main contender (Cyril Ramaphosa). Once this has been achieved, he might sleep more peacefully at night. All three facets of this strategy demand a cleansing of those that obstruct the President and his support-base. Pravin Gordhan and selected other members of cabinet are the direct targets. To this end, Zuma is strategically shaping his future. And, as a consequence thereof, the potential short-to-medium term future of his party and South Africa. This is a high-risk strategy but one that shows increasing urgency as the ANC’s elective conference looms at the end of the year. Zuma cannot allow the prevailing political pendulum to swing away from securing his future. He has already prevaricated for well over a year and his position of power has deteriorated. While he still has the chains to the top job, this may well be his last chance to act. But, at the same time, Zuma is caught between the proverbial rock-and-a-hard-place. Should he reconstitute his cabinet in his own image, he risks unleashing an unintended set of political consequences that could either fracture his own party or be the making of a rapid downfall. Should he be forced to step away from his desired actions, he equally will look weak, a real lame-duck and in danger of marginalisation. The decision to act on Gordhan and the broader cabinet therefore rests on an assessment of which risk factor is the better to bare. And ultimately, the ANC’s Top 6 and NEC will guide him. But, if political and legal survival is at stake, personal self-interest will surely be the final arbiter of any choice. Need to stay informed? Published by Tiso Blackstar and distributed 
                with the Financial Mail on the last Thursday
                of every month except December and January.