The finance minister, Pravin Gordhan, has told an emotional gathering of Treasury officials “our souls are not for sale”, saying: “We don’t need anybody’s brown bags and we hope that more and more South Africans will make it absolutely clear that our country is not for sale.” He was speaking after he and his deputy, Mcebisi Jonas, were fired by president Jacob Zuma late on Thursday night. “We are here to serve the South African public and no narrow interests. We commend the deputy minister for his stance last year for saying he was offered a bag of cash. If you do commend him, you can clap,” he said to loud applause. “Over the last 15, 16 months we have been subjected to the most horrific attacks on the work that we do,” said Gordhan. He condemned the use of a “mysterious text” masquerading as an intelligence report “that says that the two of us are involved in a massive conspiracy to undermine the country. This is not the basis on which you relieve from office a minister of finance and a deputy minister of finance.” Gordhan called on South African to ask the question: “Are these guys representing our interests? “Even if the State of Capture report is one third true, we should be very concerned. "If decisions are being made elsewhere, we should all be very afraid." Jonas spoke out against “the diversion of state resources” to serve private interests. “All of us as South Africans should wake up and smell the coffee. All of us have an interest in ensuring that our country is stable. When things turn to be ugly and bad, institutions tend to be weakened. We are at a crossroads as South Africans.” Jonas said South Africa faced a national challenge as “political decay is deepening.” Gordhan revealed that Zuma had told him when he appointed him to the position in December 2015: “You are the man they say can calm the markets.” He revealed how he had been recalled from the investor: “When the plane landed at Heathrow aiport at 6am on Monday morning, I put my phone on and see this message that says: come back immediately and cancel this road show.” Need to stay informed? Published by Tiso Blackstar and distributed 
                with the Financial Mail on the last Thursday
                of every month except December and January.