Acting National Police Commissioner Khomotso Phahlane has confirmed three arrests in relation to the break-in at the Office of the Chief Justice on Saturday. “They will face charges for other crimes they are possibly linked to pending further investigation in this matter‚” Phahlane told journalists in Pretoria on Wednesday. The men would appear in court in Mamelodi‚ Phahlane said. “The multi-disciplinary team led by Deputy Provincial Commissioner of Crime Detection in Gauteng Major General Mary Motsepe has been hard at work and their efforts culminated in the arrest of three men in Mamelodi over the past few days‚” Phahlane said. “The team followed leads and information that resulted in operations being conducted on identified addresses in Mamelodi in search of the stolen equipment and perpetrators.” Phahlane said that during the search of the identified premises three men were arrested “to enable further investigation into the matter”. Various items‚ including illegal firearms and fake identity documents‚ were seized. “These items are considered evidential material and will be presented in court.” “We are also pleased to report that a vehicle possibly used as a getaway car during the commission of the crime has been seized.” Phahlane said during further interviews of those arrested revealed the identity of a person with critical information required to solve the crime and the recovery of the stolen IT equipment. “The SAPS is calling upon Nkosinathi Msimango who was in the vicinity of Mamelodi on the day of the arrests and who has valuable info and insight into the commission of this crime to approach the investigating officer or to report to the nearest police station.” “The three suspects arrested are expected to appear in court in Mamelodi today where they will face charges for other crimes they are possibly linked to‚ pending further investigation in this matter‚” Phahlane said. “We believe the seriousness of this crime and the stature of the Office of the Chief Justice will be considered in the further processing of cases the apprehended people are linked to‚” he continued. - TMG Digital Need to stay informed? Published by Tiso Blackstar and distributed 
                with the Financial Mail on the last Thursday
                of every month except December and January.