President Jacob Zuma recalled his Finance Minister, Pravin Gordhan, from an international investor road show in the UK and cancelled a similiar event planned for the US to be led by his deputy, Mcebisi Jonas. His intention, it is now common cause, was to remove them from office and finally implement his long-delayed takeover of the Treasury. That would have taken place today. That would have stopped Gordhan's court action against the Guptas - set to start today - in its tracks and allowed Zuma to convene his new-look cabinet tomorrow. What other reason could there have been for the drama and the urgency? Zuma reportedly told members of the SACP that he intended to remove Gordhan at a meeting last night. But Zuma's well-laid plans did not reckon with a sudden dramatic event out of his control - the passing of struggle legend Ahmed Kathrada. Now Zuma faces a political dilemma. If he goes ahead with the firing of Gordhan today, he will face a massive political backlash, not least by speakers at Kathrada's funeral, set for tomorrow morning. Proceedings will be broadcast on national television and you can imagine speaker after speaker expressing outrage at Zuma over Gordhan's firing. Kathrada was, after all, a leading critic of Zuma and one of the few prepared to stick his neck out and demand his resignation, which he did in writing. Zuma, shedding crocodile tears over Kathrada in a brief statement, announced that Cyril Ramaphosa would lead government's presence at the graveside. He knows that he cannot attend. He risks a round booing from the crowd. The memory of what happened at Nelson Mandela's funeral is still fresh. The firing of Gordhan will have to wait with Zuma tolerating a little egg on his face over the dramatic recall from the investor road show. But it will come as soon as the political air has cleared. Need to stay informed? Published by Tiso Blackstar and distributed 
                with the Financial Mail on the last Thursday
                of every month except December and January.