The first details of a tense late-night meeting at which President Jacob Zuma said he was going ahead with the firing of Pravin Gordhan from the finance ministry have emerged. Zuma convened a meeting of the ANC's 'top six' on Wednesday evening. Present were his deputy Cyril Ramaphosa, secretary general Gwede Mantashe, treasurer Zweli Mkhize, chair Baleka Mbete and deputy secretary general Jessie Duarte. At the marathon three-hour meeting, Zuma said he was firing Gordhan and Jonas because of an 'intelligence report' which purported to prove they intended meeting with people who wished to see Zuma overthrown when they travelled to the UK and US on investor roadshows planned for this week. Zuma authorised the roadshows and then rescinded his authorisation. Gordhan was already in the UK and had to fly back to the country. Jonas had to cancel plans for the US leg of the roadshow. He was expected to fire both on Tuesday morning when Gordhan arrived back in the country, but struggle veteran Ahmed Kathrada passed away early that morning, forcing him to delay his action. The intelligence report, which appears to be the work of amateurs and which lacks the usual hallmarks of a tested intelligence document, has been dismissed as a poorly-executed hoax by most who have seen it. Ramaphosa and Mantashe both told Zuma that he would be making a mistake if he fired Gordhan and Jonas, but Zuma insisted on going ahead. "They objected to the use of the intelligence report to justify firing Pravin, but he insisted," said a person close to the meeting. The decision leaves the ANC divided at the highest level. Coming in the wake of the funeral of veteran Ahmed Kathrada on Wednesday at which Zuma was severely criticised to loud applause and standing ovations, the divisions at the highest level may have serious consequences for party unity. Need to stay informed? Published by Tiso Blackstar and distributed 
                with the Financial Mail on the last Thursday
                of every month except December and January.