DA leader Mmusi Maimane wants Helen Zille to quit as Western Cape premier but the former Cape Town mayor will not go without a fight, sources say. Party members close to Maimane told the Sunday Times this week that the former Zille protégé believes the storm sparked by her tweet 10 days ago, in which she praised aspects of colonialism, means she has to go. "Sometimes, in a marriage, ostensibly an argument is about something trivial like leaving your clothes lying on the floor, but actually it is about the state and the future of the marriage," a senior source sympathetic to Maimane said. "Helen must do the honourable thing." A Maimane confidant confirmed that the DA leader wants Zille to resign as premier. "Even Helen Zille's people in the Western Cape are gatvol [fed up]. But we'll see. She won't go without a fight ... there are similarities between HZ and Thatcher." Zille and Maimane met behind closed doors on Thursday night in his parliamentary office, but could not reach a resolution . It is unclear if Maimane told Zille to step down . Maimane's backers want Zille removed as the scandal could harm the DA's efforts to grow support among black voters. But removing Zille as premier could backfire as she still enjoys strong support from many whites, who form a solid chunk of DA voters. Maimane and Zille yesterday refused to share details of their meeting. "I can't talk about this, I can't comment," said Zille. "Whether the federal legal commission is charging me or not, whether I met Mmusi or I did not, what was said, what happened or what did not happen, I can't comment on this, OK?" Maimane said: "I cannot say anything about any meeting. It is important that the federal legal commission be left to do its job in a fair and balanced way. That is the difference between the DA and other parties. There will not be political interference." Read the full story in the Sunday Times Need to stay informed? Published by Tiso Blackstar and distributed 
                with the Financial Mail on the last Thursday
                of every month except December and January.