“I think it’s a load of rubbish, if I’m honest. A lot of people made a lot of money out of it and David Brailsford used it constantly as his calling card. But I always thought it was a load of rubbish.” So said 2011 Tour de France champion Bradley Wiggins, about the concept of marginal gains, during a public appearance last week. Wiggins, it must be said, speaks with some personal venom fuelled by his perception that he has been sacrificed by his former team in the sport’s latest doping scandal. He is not, however, the first person to cast doubt on the mythical marginal gains concept, neither is he likely to be the last. Marginal gains, for the uninitiated, is a philosophy of innovation that Sky’s team director, Brailsford, made famous. The idea is that hidden advantages could be summed together to produce an overall improvement (a faster cyclist) by finding 1% gains in these up-to-then undiscovered areas. In the case of Sky, that meant doing things such as providing riders with their own pillows and mattresses at hotels, adding pineapple juice to water to make it more palatable, warming down after stages, testing bikes in wind tunnels and using antibacterial hand gels to reduce the risk of infections. Each of these was meant to contribute to performance, importantly, in ways no other team had discovered. This allowed team Sky’s dominance of the Tour de France, starting in 2011, to be attributed to this philosophy and the unique processes they had in place. Before the Sky began falling down, marginal gains was spoken of with mythical reverence. Matthew Syed, a UK journalist and chief marginal gains evangelist, described it as a “doctrine” having “revolutionised some sports”. It also revolutionised his bank account, spawning books and corporate-speaking gigs that were not marginal in cost. As to whether it was revolutionary to sports, the answer is definitively no. For as long as competitive sport has existed, coaches and athletes have understood the need to optimise all the elements that produce performance. It’s a big part of why positions such as “high performance director” exist and is a cornerstone of my own profession of sports science. I started out in elite sport with a marginal gains mindset, but I didn’t think of it in those words — it was just sports science to me, our fundamental reason for existence. This was in 2006, long before Brailsford, which shows again that Sky’s philosophy was a repackaging rather than an invention. What I discovered immediately was that elite performance is much more “resolute” than people think — finding 1% is an enormous challenge and pineapple juice, pillows and mattress don’t cut it. So a lot of what was being promoted as a gain was an irrelevant sideshow and it trivialised the true contributions made by sports science and high-performance management. The other objection I had to marginal gains was the implicit arrogance. By attributing Sky’s success to marginal gains, some in the media propagated the idea that Sky was the only one invested in aerodynamic bikes, fuel and hydration strategies, health and recovery, when in fact some of the best minds in sports science had been there for decades. Had this reality been acknowledged, then marginal gains as a source of competitive advantage evaporates. This again trivialised the real challenges in high-performance sport and, by extension, sports science. We do not, as I’ve joked, study for 10 years to help win medals by providing fluffy pillows and teaching adults how to wash their hands! So it was how it was framed — the context more than the concept — that was objectionable. As a concept, there is no doubt that most businesses and individuals would improve performance in most normal domains by adopting a mindset that seeks to add the effect of changes in various areas of improvement. Perhaps a marginal gains philosophy survives in that world, getting people and businesses from X to Y, improving themselves. Outside of sport, however, if Wiggins’ “betrayal” is any indication, marginal gains is exposed, confirmed to cynics as a smokescreen for nefarious gains — and to everyone else as the latest management-speak fad. Need to stay informed? Published by Tiso Blackstar and distributed 
                with the Financial Mail on the last Thursday
                of every month except December and January.