Fifa legal experts are poring over regulations and holding discussions in Zurich to determine whether Bafana Bafana‘s World Cup qualifier against Senegal should be replayed after the referee was found guilty of fixing the outcome of the game. Shockwaves reverberated throughout football at the beginning of the week when Fifa said its disciplinary committee had banned Joseph Lamptey of Ghana for fixing the result of the match. Football's world governing body said Lamptey had been banned for life from football. He was found guilty of unlawfully influencing the match result when South Africa beat Senegal 2-1 in their Group D qualifier at the Peter Mokaba Stadium in Polokwane in November. Linesman David Lartey‚ who was also charged‚ was found not guilty. Fifa's statement on Monday said more details would be made available once the decision was binding. In other words, once Lamptey has exhausted any appeals he might be considering. Fifa insiders revealed that they had been alerted to the possibility of match-fixing by irregular betting patterns. Lamptey has already been suspended by CAF and removed from the panel to officiate at the 2017 Africa Cup of Nations finals for his poor performance in the game. But that sanction came without any knowledge that he had been paid to fix the result. Fifa must now consider whether it will nullify the outcome of the game and order a replay, something it has done only once in World Cup history‚ some 12 years ago when it declared invalid the result of the 2006 World Cup qualifying match between Uzbekistan and Bahrain and made the two countries replay the game. But, on that occasion, it was a technical issue. The Japanese referee had made a blatant error. Fifa monitors all betting on its matches and competitions.Irregular spikes in betting or unusually high amounts of money placed on the outcome of a game trigger alarm bells. Last month Fifa closed down its own Early Warning System and outsourced the work to Sportradar‚ a specialist private company which was already detecting global match-fixing and irregular betting patterns for Uefa‚ the Asian Football Confederation and South America‘s Conmebol. Match-fixing has already bedevilled Bafana — before the 2010 World Cup, when several friendly games were fixed by a Singapore betting syndicate led by Wilson Raj Perumal. — TMG Digital Need to stay informed? Published by Tiso Blackstar and distributed 
                with the Financial Mail on the last Thursday
                of every month except December and January.