Faced with an increasingly hostile alliance with the ANC, SA Communist Party leader Blade Nzimande has urged party members to openly discuss the prospect of going it alone in 2019 and beyond. The debate is gaining momentum ahead of the party’s 14th national congress in July, with the Young Communist League and senior SACP leaders speaking openly about it. Addressing hundreds of supporters at the OR Tambo memorial lecture in Umlazi, Durban, yesterday, the SACP general secretary said the party would no longer be intimidated. “We have been talking about the need to reconfigure the alliance. I challenge you that the delegate you send to our congress in July be given a mandate to discuss this. You must be bold,” Nzimande said. “In the central committee we have come to one correct conclusion — you may differ with us — that the way the alliance has been operating since 1994 has reached its time. It’s not the alliance that has reached its time but the way it works. We need an alternative. “Factionalism is destroying the alliance. They say we are moaning, but let’s not moan comrades let’s come up with concrete proposals. Let’s debate this issue and let us not be intimidated. We are an independent political party, let’s debate on whether it is not time for the SACP to stand for elections on its own,” Nzimande said. “We feel it at national level that we are no longer in the alliance with the ANC but in alliance with the dominant faction in the ANC. “We must not be misunderstood, we are really committed to this alliance, we were in the forefront of building this alliance, but it has to move with the times, that’s very important,” he said.On Friday SACP second deputy general secretary Solly Mapaila said the party’s Mpumalanga structures had already decided that the party should contest the 2019 elections. “We can’t be naïve that the decision would not affect the alliance,” said Mapaila. Young Communist League chairman Yershen Pillay said the SACP was the only party to lead radical economic transformation. “Should the SACP decide to lead a new movement for change, it will inevitably result in the termination of the tripartite alliance. We will have no choice but to directly contest the ANC in 2019,” said Pillay. - The Times Need to stay informed? Published by Tiso Blackstar and distributed 
                with the Financial Mail on the last Thursday
                of every month except December and January.