Dear BusinessLIVE reader, This is a brief note to tell you what's available on our BusinessLIVE Premium site right now. To give you an idea of some of the top writers you can catch on BusinessLIVE Premium, we put together a collage of 18 of our media stars. I'm sure you will recognise most of this group of very smart, thoughtful writers who contribute to our pages. Our top story this morning comes from Business Day under the headline 'Banks have case to answer on forex'. The full text of this is only available to premium subscribers. You can read a free short version of the story here. If you haven't completed your subscription yet, here's where you can sign up. We've tried to make it as simple and painless as possible. And, at just R4 a day, we've made it accessible to all. Also on BL Premium this morning is the very popular weekly column by Jonathan Jansen. This week he points out in 'Expect the nation to follow Parliament's violent example' that we should not be surprised when people imitate the thuggish behaviour that their leaders display in Parliament. In his words: This is what happens when an utterly corrupt and contemptuous leader fails to step down. After all, the Constitutional Court found that the president had failed to uphold the laws of the land. Popular premium content includes Peter Bruce's essential daily column 'Bruce's List', in which he writes about why businessmen don't usually make good politicians. Here's a quote: Not a day goes by that I am not more convinced President Donald Trump cannot see out his first term. The Republicans themselves will impeach him and get rid of him. Pence will take over. He’ll be another George Bush. Peter's columns are available only to premium subscribers. The 'Market Watch' column in the Financial Mail by Marc Hasenfuss is essential reading for investors. Today he looks at the mercurial Curro Holdings, saying: When a share is accorded a trailing earnings multiple of about 140 times it’s not difficult for shareholders to pay special attention to a trading update. Indications are that PSG Group’s star pupil will bring home another pleasing report in the year to end-December. Marc's column is available only to premium subscribers. Also essential reading on the markets is Michel Pireu's 'Street Dogs' column. Today he discusses why smart people don't earn more: How much is success determined by innate intelligence? Economist James Heckman says it’s not what people think. He likes to ask how much of the difference between people’s incomes can be tied to IQ. Most guess about 25%, even 50%, he says. But the data suggest a much smaller influence: about 1% or 2%. Street Dogs is available only to premium subscribers. Also on BL Premium today is Business Day's lead story, 'Kumba tumbles as it withholds dividend', by mining specialist Allan Seccombe. Here's the first paragraph: Kumba Iron Ore surprised some investors in the market and sent its share price tumbling by withholding its 2016 full-year dividend, citing volatile markets and exchange rates as well as the exit of parent Anglo American as the reasons for holding onto its rapidly growing cash pile. The full text of Business Day's front-page lead is available only to premium subscribers. BL Premium carries a reflection on the State of the Nation Address by columnist Steven Friedman under the headline 'The Sona show’s annual narcissistic performance ... and then?' And columnist Gareth van Onselen writes about the 2019 election under the headline 'Gauteng 2019: The mother of all battles'. It's a detailed analysis that crunches the numbers. Here's a paragraph: The first important trend to notice about Gauteng is the historical stability of the ANC’s vote in absolute terms. In the five provincial elections since 1994, the number of votes it has secured has not fluctuated much: 2.41-million (1994); 2.48-million (1999); 2.33-million (2004); 2.66-million (2009) and 2.38-million (2014). The average is 2.44-million votes Xhanti Payi writes about economics. This week's column is titled 'Trump’s rise a chance to question markets' and Payi observes: Whatever one thinks of leaders such as Trump, they are at the very pulse of the people. Consider for example the response the so-called markets have had to his election as president. Writing in The Washington Post, international politics professor Daniel W Drezner asked, “What does the stock market tell us about the Trump administration?”, observing that financial markets had been surprisingly chilled. One of the features of BusinessLIVE Premium is that it brings you the best journalism from London's Financial Times. In an article headed 'Theresa May will rue her failure to lower expectations', columnist Janan Ganesh writes: May is both invincible and frail. She could hold power for a decade, or two more years. If it is hard to picture the second scenario, remember that every prime minister since Margaret Thatcher lost their credibility in one go, not in stages. This is a small selection of the content that is available to subscribers to BusinessLIVE Premium. I wish you happy reading. Please don't hesitate to contact us at this email address with any queries or suggestions: feedback@businesslive.co.za. 