Thousands of residents will have to trek elsewhere for hot showers after an emergency three-day water supply interruption hit parts of Johannesburg on Tuesday. Taps will run dry in the wider Randburg area due to a damaged pipe line on Washington Drive in Northriding‚ affecting the Linden 1 and 2‚ Kensington B and Blairgowrie reservoirs‚ said a statement by Johannesburg Water. “The pipe was damaged by a contractor‚ who was busy with pipe installation in the area. Johannesburg Water is also engaging the contractor to recover on losses of water and repair costs.” Technicians have started fixing the problem‚ which may take up to 72 hours to resolve. On Tuesday morning reservoir levels had dropped dramatically. Linden Tower and Kensington Tower were also affected. “Consumers in the area not experiencing water shortages are urged to reduce consumption to immediate household needs to avoid rapid decline in available supply‚” said Johannesburg Water. Affected neighbourhoods include:Robindale‚ Jacanlee‚ Cresta‚ Darrenwood‚ Aldara Park‚ Victory Park‚ President Ridge‚ Robin Acres‚ Hurlingham‚ Bordeaux‚ Lyme Park‚ Ferndale‚ Risidale‚ Blackheath‚ Linden‚ Blairgowrie‚ Robin Hills‚ Windsor‚ Fontainebleau‚ Linden‚ Kensington B‚ Craighall‚ Craighall Park‚ Windsor‚ Malanshof‚ Ruiterhof‚ Strijdompark‚ Praegville‚ Northcliff‚ Glenadrienne‚ Blairgowrie‚ Oerder Park‚ parts of Bryanston‚ Beverley Gardens and Meadowhurst. According to Statistics South Africa's 2011 census‚ Randburg had a population size of 337‚053 and 123‚767 households. Water tanks provided by the municipality are available at:- Corner Anchor and Chester in Bryanston- Corner Conduit and Westview in Osummit - Corner Kays and Cypress in Bryanston - Corner Highview and West in Ferndale- Corner Speldekussing and Serruna in Ferndale- Brightwater Commons on Republic Road in Ferndale - Corner Hammer and Standard Close in Strijdom Park - Corner Sterling and Fabriek in Strijdom Park - Corner Milne and Daniel in Bryanbrink - Ferndale High School on Milner Road in Kensington B - Medicross clinic‚ Rabi Street‚ Randburg- Westview Park in Vandia Grove - Corner Sirdar and Abington in Kensington B - On Blackwood Street in Bryanston- Corner Republic Road and Silver Pine Avenue at the Sasol garage- Corner Bramfisher Drive and First street at the BP garage- Dukes and Beatrice Street at the Spar in Windsor- Corner Republic and Judges at the Engen garage - TMG Digital Need to stay informed? Published by Tiso Blackstar and distributed 
                with the Financial Mail on the last Thursday
                of every month except December and January.