We would like to introduce you to BusinessLIVE Premium, an affordable way to enjoy the full benefits of BusinessLIVE, South Africa’s number-one source of quality news, analysis and commentary on business, politics and current affairs. BusinessLIVE – which publishes outstanding content from trusted South African media brands Business Day, the Financial Mail, the Sunday Times’s Business Times, Investors Monthly and the Rand Daily Mail – has taken the next step. Much of our content, including our running coverage of the day’s business news, remains free but we have worked hard to create for our subscribers a package of exclusive news and comment from our own titles and our international news and data partners. BusinessLIVE Premium gives you access the top writers, columnists and exclusive news from these brands as well as the best of the Financial Times and a leading article from The Wall Street Journal each day for R120 per month – that’s only about R4 a day. BL Premium includes writers such as Justice Malala, Jonathan Jansen, Tim Cohen, Steven Friedman, Rob Rose, Ron Derby and Aubrey Matshiqi; exclusive access to the full daily Business Day front-page lead and the weekly Financial Mail cover story; and the best news from the Business Times. You also get in-depth financial data and detailed company analysis from trusted provider Morningstar. Then, the BL Premium Plus package, at R349 a month, will give you access to all the above plus full digital access to The Wall Street Journal every day and e-editions (online copies of the print products) of Business Day and the Financial Mail. View our full list of subscription packages (including print and digital combinations) View our subscriptions information and FAQs  In a world where “alternative facts” and fake news are undermining the trustworthiness of the media, more and more readers are turning to our trusted media brands to provide them with accurate, well-informed insight into current affairs. Hiring the best writers, columnists and editors costs money and there is no sustainable way to bring you this level of writing without charging for it. We have decided to charge a reasonable rate to make our full content offering available to as many readers as possible.  It’s easy: click here and follow the simple steps to gain access to the invaluable insights and big news from these top media brands. If you have questions or experience problems, please contact us by email at feedback@businesslive.co.za. We promise to get back to you as quickly as possible. To see what is available on BL Premium, click here or on the “BL Premium” logo in the masthead of BusinessLIVE or any of the websites that fall under it.  Good news: all existing subscribers to the print editions of Business Day and Financial Mail will have free access to BL Premium Plus. All you have to do is register on BusinessLIVE with the same email address you used for your print subscription.  Special arrangements will be made for corporate subscribers and there will be different rates and packages on offer – please contact us on Tel: 0860 52 52 00 or helpdesk@businesslive.co.za so we can link your BusinessLIVE account to your corporate subscription.  Yes. There is a 20% pensioner discount available on our subscription packages. We verify pensioner discounts via your identity number. Please contact us on Tel: 0860 52 52 00 or helpdesk@businesslive.co.za to apply for this discount.  We hope you will join us on our journey to understand and explain the increasingly complex world in which we live. Questions or comments? Email us at feedback@businesslive.co.za. Need to stay informed? Published by Tiso Blackstar and distributed 
                with the Financial Mail on the last Thursday
                of every month except December and January.