I really should write something about the State of the Nation Address, I told myself yesterday evening. But it was my daughter's 13th birthday and we went out to supper instead. We walked down the road to a small local restaurant and enjoyed chicken and vegetables. The chicken was tender and coated in a thin gravy. I knew that many of my colleagues were working very hard on reporting this event back at the office and that on television sets around the country, President Jacob Zuma was starting to speak. Then I quickly forgot about all of that. A 13th birthday is a special occasion, a landmark on the road of life. It was wonderful, sitting out on the pavement, enjoying a modest meal with the family. Then we walked up the road back home. I switched on the television and, to my amazement, Zuma had not yet started speaking. The Speaker and the EFF's Julius Malema were in some sort of shouting match. He was mocking and taunting her, she was edging ever closer to her nuclear option. Then she pulled the trigger and the white-shirted security guards dragged the red-shirted EFF member from the chamber. Someone was chuckling into their microphone. Then the DA walked out and someone used the F-word. The 13-year-old who had been in and out of the room took note. I joked that she wasn't old enough for this show. The violence and abuse done with, and the house emptied of all but the Zuma loyalists, the speech began. I really should start writing something about this speech, I told myself. I opened the laptop. It needed charging, but there was a chance it would make it to the bitter end. I left it uncharged. My pulse ticked up by one beat per minute. Zuma, having made the claim that the economy was on the mend, was just hitting his stride when the 13-year-old re-entered the room bearing cue-cards. "Won't you please listen to my speech?" she asked. His speech or my speech, your call, no pressure … The television on pause, she began her confident delivery. It was about what goes on in the world in ten minutes. How many planes crash, how many people die, how many trees are cut down, how many strikes of lightning there are ... fascinating and engaging. Then she was off to bed. I un-paused the television and the Zuma speech resumed. He was talking about 'radical economic transformation' and the racially skewed structure of the South African economy. It struck me that, like Julius Malema, Zuma was giving a good cause a bad name. It is actually pretty shocking that the economy has been so little transformed to allow new, black entrants in the span of 23 years since democracy. Zuma appeared to have chosen the worst-possible numbers he could find to make his case, but even the best-possible numbers were not good. But to hear Zuma say it, I could only think of how he was bent on transforming the economy into a machine to enrich his friends at the nearby shebeen. (Saxonwold is just down the road from where I live.) What he was offering was a chimera. What was needed was a proper plan to make this an inclusive economy. Did any political party have one? I really should write about how Zuma was giving a good cause a bad name, I thought. But I didn't. Until now. Does this count? Need to stay informed? Published by Tiso Blackstar and distributed 
                with the Financial Mail on the last Thursday
                of every month except December and January.